gcomputation: an R Package for Estimating Marginal Effects Using G-Computation

================

## Description

The R package ‘gcomputation’ provides functions to compute G-Computation (GC) to estimate marginal effects. It has estimating marginal functions for binary, time-to-event, continuous and count outcomes regarding two exposures. The package implements GC with various working models or algorithms, referred to as Q-models.

## Key Features

`gc_binary`, `gc_times`, `gc_continuous` and `gc_count`  are the main functions, implementing GC to estimate marginal functions for binary, time-to-event, continuous and count outcomes regarding two exposures using a variety of modeling strategies.

The package supports several methods to construct the Q-model:
*   "all": Uses a usual logistic or Cox model, incorporating all variables provided in the formula.
*   "lasso": Implements L1 regularization regression, which can perform predictor selection. It uses the glmnet package.
*   "ridge": Applies L2 regularization regression, also utilizing the glmnet package. This is equivalent to Elastic Net with an alpha value of 0.
*   "elasticnet": Combines both L1 and L2 regularizations regression, also using the glmnet package. The alpha parameter controls the mix between L1 and L2, typically ranging from 0 to 1.
*   "aic": Performs forward selection regression based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), using stepAIC.
*   "bic": Performs forward selection regression based on the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), also using stepAIC with `k=log(nrow(data))`.

The package offers estimation of three types of marginal effects:
*   "ATE" (Average Treatment effect on the entire population): The marginal effect if the entire sample were treated versus entirely untreated.
*   "ATT" (Average Treatment effect on the treated): The marginal effect if the treated patients (group = 1) would have been untreated.
*   "ATU" (Average Treatment effect on the untreated): The marginal effect if the untreated patients (group = 0) would have been treated.

S3 methods are included for objects generated by gc_logistic and gc_survival functions, allowing for:
*   `print`: To print a summary of the results.
*   `summary`: To provide a more detailed summary of the prognostic capacities, including confidence intervals.
*   `plot`: To visualize the results through calibration plots or effect-specific plots (proportion for logistic, survival curve for survival).

Other Exported Functions and Data:
*   `transport`: Applies an already fitted GC model (an object of class `gcbinary`, `gctimes`, `gccontinuous` or `gccount`) to a `newdata` set to estimate marginal effects in a new population.
* Datasets: Includes the dataPROPHYVAP (simulated randomized clinical trial data) and dataCOHORT (simulated observational cohort data).
* Multiple Imputations (MI-BOOT): Support for the MI-BOOT approach is added using the `boot.mi` argument, integrating the `mice` package for handling missing data.

The package also supports bootstrapping for confidence interval estimation, with options for "bcv" (default) or "boot" types and a default of 500 bootstrap resamples. Users can also control whether tuning parameters are estimated within each bootstrap iteration or on the total population.

## Basic Usage
For a binary outcome:
``` r
data("dataPROPHYVAP")

.f <- formula(VAP ~ GROUP * (AGE + SEX + BMI + DIABETES))

# 1. Standard execution
# boot.tune=TRUE estimates tuning parameters inside each bootstrap iteration.
gc_bin <- gc_binary(formula=.f, model="ridge", data=dataPROPHYVAP, group="GROUP",
                 cv=10, boot.type="bcv", boot.number=500, boot.tune=TRUE,
                 effect="ATE", progress=TRUE, seed=5192)
gc_bin

# Summary specifying Asymptotic CIs ("norm")
summary(gc_bin, ci.type="norm")

# Calibration plot
plot(gc_bin, method="calibration")


# 2. Execution with multiple imputation
# Uses boot.mi=TRUE and m=5. boot.tune=FALSE to only estimate it once on the complete data set
.f_mi <- formula(VAP ~ GROUP * (AGE + SEX + BMI + DIABETES + GLASGOW + INJURY))
gc_mi <- gc_binary(formula=.f_mi, model="elasticnet", data=dataPROPHYVAP,
                   group="GROUP", cv=10, boot.type="bcv", boot.number=500, boot.tune=FALSE,
                   effect="ATE", progress=TRUE, seed=8051, boot.mi=TRUE, m=5)

# Plotting the calibration curve, smoothed across m imputations
plot(gc_mi, method="calibration", smooth=TRUE) 

# Summary specifying Non-parametric CIs ("perc")
summary(gc_mi, ci.type="perc")


# 3. Transportability
# Define a new dataset (e.g., a subset of younger patients, AGE<=50)
newdata_binary <- subset(dataPROPHYVAP, AGE<=50)

# Transport the fitted gc_bin model to the new dataset
gc_transport <- transport(object=gc_bin, newdata=newdata_binary,
                              effect="ATE", boot.number=500)

summary(gc_transport, ci.type="norm")
```

For a survival outcome:
``` r
data(dataPROPHYVAP)

.ft <- formula(Surv(TIME_DEATH, DEATH) ~ GROUP * (AGE + BMI + GLASGOW + LEUKO))

gc_surv <- gc_times(formula=.ft, model="lasso", data=dataPROPHYVAP, group="GROUP",
              param.tune=0.03, boot.type="bcv", boot.number=500, boot.tune=FALSE,
              effect="ATE", pro.time=30, seed=5312)

gc_surv
summary(gc_surv, ci.type="perc")
plot(gc_surv)
```

## Installation

To install the version from GitHub:

``` r
remotes::install_github("chupverse/gcomputation")
```

## Reporting bugs

You can report any issues at this
[link](https://github.com/chupverse/gcomputation/issues).
